---
layout: post
title:  "Parlatype 4.0 released"
date:   2023-11-26
---

> Eternity is very long, especially towards the end.  
> -- Woody Allan

Despite a delay of 18 months I'm proud to present Parlatype 4.0 together with Parlatype LibreOffice Extension 4.0. The main difference is the switch to GTK 4.

In the meantime there was a lot of fuzz about AI. Parlatype's automatic speech recognition is lagging more and more behind the current state of the art. In fact, I don't recommend it for automatic speech recognition anymore. To be honest I can't remember, if I ever did. In its current state it's best used for manual transcriptions or just as an audio player showing a waveform. Of course there's a faint hope to catch up a bit with AI development in the next releases.

# Main changes

* Switch to GTK 4
* Screenshots for help pages are generated automatically
* Fix an MPRIS related crash

# Translations

I'm happy to be on Hosted Weblate now. There are new or updated translations for Basque, Chinese (Simplified), English (United Kingdom), Finnish, French, Indonesian, Italian, Norwegian Bokmål, Polish,  Portuguese, Russian, Slovak, Spanish, Turkish and Ukrainian.

# Download source code

The links below point you to the source code and an installable extension (Parlatype.oxt):

[Download Parlatype source](https://github.com/gkarsay/parlatype/releases/tag/v4.0){: .download-button}

[Download Parlatype LibreOffice Extension](https://github.com/gkarsay/parlatype-libreoffice-extension/releases/tag/v4.0){: .download-button}
